Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
Carl Huss joined the Army Air Corps before U.S.
involvement in World War II started with the bombing of Pearl Harbor.
He was just looking to learn a trade, and indeed he did as a radio man, stationed first for nearly three years in Alaska, then in the Philippines near war's end.
He became pretty well versed in American-Russian relations during the war, and that's just a part of a fascinating story of service.
Please welcome, if you will, Carl Huss to Veterans of the Valley.
Carl, it's a pleasure to have you here.
I love your story of service in World War II.
Even though it didn't necessarily involve any combat, it was still a very interesting story, you as a radio man.
Let's start.
You grew up in Oklahoma in the Depression.
You wanted a career job.
Right after you graduated from high school, you were in the Army in 1940, right?
Right.
Yeah.
Talk about that.
Well, Lord, I came a little old town in Oklahoma, depression, no jobs.
I'm going into the service to get me a career.
Learned photography and come out and, you know, make a lot of money.
Ha!
Didn't work out that way.
No.
So I joined the Air Corps, hitchhiked from Oklahoma up to Illinois and joined the Air Corps there in Illinois.
And I sat there and did KP.
I signed up for photography.
And I waited and waited, and KP and KP finally I said, hey, what else have you got?
They said radio, so I went to radio school down in Scott Field, which is south, down south in Illinois.
Right, right, right.
Several months of that.
Put up the board, where are you going?
Elmendorf Field, Anchorage, Alaska.
Where in the world is that?
I'll soon learn.
So I got up there in October of 41, of course, before Pearl Harbor.
Right.
I want to stop you there because you talked about how you had grown up and sort of the difference a little bit when you went into the service.
Carl is a writer.
And we're going to talk about that a lot more, because his 30-year career was in journalism, as a matter of fact.
And he's written a book here.
This is a lot of book about, this is actually a collection of his writings.
It just goes on and on and on.
And I want to read just real quick from this, because this sort of refers to when you went from your normal life, when you were in high school, into the service.
And he writes in poem, as a matter of fact.
He says, my first meal in this
a mess hall nearly blew my mind.
I was raised on beans and cornbread.
Like this, I had never dined.
There was bread and fruit, three kinds of meat.
This was a dream.
Also five kinds of vegetables topped off with cake and ice cream.
Man, I was in hog heaven, and I walloped three times a day.
Besides the chow came free clothes, plus 21 bucks monthly pay.
I couldn't believe some guys who griped about the grub.
As I said, many were poor like me.
Who you kidding, bub?
Aside from those amenities, we drilled and pulled KP.
KP stands for Kitchen Police, no arrests, just drudgery.
So going into the Army, you ate a lot better and you dressed a lot better and you got some money for it.
Hey, I was in all gamins, I said.
I couldn't believe it.
I thought, well, they gave us this show to get us in and then after that it's going to be out.
Man, it was that way all the time.
I was happy.
But you were at Elmendorf Field.
That's where you were first sent.
And that's for people who don't know their geography.
That's just near, I guess, just north of Anchorage, right?
Very, very near Anchorage.
Right outside.
Outscourts, you'd say.
Of Anchorage.
Talk about what you did.
You were a radio operator.
Not talking, but tapping out.
You were a tapper.
Right, dots and dash, that sort of stuff.
Right.
So, of course, in the radio, you learn regular alphabet, U.S., dots and dash, da-da-da-da is Q. But we got up there and found out that, hey, they had a different...
What the hell is this?
It's all in two extra numbers, two extra letters.
Turned out we were learning to communicate with the Russians.
Right.
So in a few months, they got me on a plane with Master Sergeant.
We went to Nome, Alaska.
And Nome, Alaska.
You're talking about where is a place?
Nome, Alaska.
It's right on the Bering Sea.
Right.
Far western part of the state.
Excuse this, but my saying, the rest of the Alaska is lush.
You see it all the time.
At Nome, Bering, nothing.
No tree.
No tree, period.
Right.
As I told people,
If Alaska ever got sick, where they'd give the enema would be at Nome, Alaska.
I've heard you say that.
I'm sure the Chamber of Commerce of Nome probably doesn't put that on their sign.
Chamber of Commerce.
They're lucky to have a sheriff.
This would be a good time to jump ahead a little bit and talk about the weather.
Not only the weather,
But the northern lights, during the wintertime, it's light for only about three hours a day.
During the summertime, it doesn't turn dark at all.
Sort of how that affected you and how a kid from Oklahoma got used to that.
First of all, at Nome, three months of the year, in the summertime, the harbor was open.
Otherwise, it's frozen solid.
So any supplies you had for eating or food came in the boat those three months.
Well, along about January, we were running out of meat.
So they'd get on the half-track and go out to the wilderness and shoot a reindeer and drag it in.
So that was our meat for the rest of the year.
Surprisingly, when we first moved up there, we were in tents.
Eventually, they got the Quonset Huts, which was the metal half-circle deal.
And quite comfortable, really.
And the Northern Lights...
I think once in a while, I actually saw them in Oklahoma one time.
But it's just a display of violets, blues, greens, like gases just moving all over it.
Pretty, but, boy, for radio signals.
It would... They killed it.
It killed you, Ray Sid.
It would bounce your signals to who knows where.
Well, it's static.
Right.
Right, right.
That's why I can hardly hear.
That's why I have two hearing aids today.
Right, right.
Because of the noise it was created from the signals bouncing off the northern lights.
And trying to hear the signal through that.
You talked about the time and where the sun would not go down or the sun would not come up depending on the time of year.
And especially during the summertime,
you had to sleep according to the clock not according to whether it got dark because it didn't get dark and sometimes that was difficult.
Well space had moved on from there moved to Fairbanks right and it's 40 50 mile below the arctic circle and which meant it didn't completely get dark but
In the so-called summertime, the sun had come up about three hours, dark.
And, of course, they, I mean, in the wintertime, it was that way, and in the summer, it was just the opposite.
Fairbanks Chamber of Commerce, and they did have that, Chamber of Commerce, had a baseball game, and they threw out the first pitch at midnight.
Thing is...
No spotlights or floodlights.
There's sunshine.
That was one of their big deals.
Right.
Baseball at midnight.
Right, right.
Sometimes you had to try to sleep while other people were playing cards or messing around, right?
Well, we were eight on and 16 off, so.
Right, right.
Why don't you talk about your job and what you did when you were in Nome, Alaska, and about the ferrying of airplanes and sort of the Russian pilots and sort of how you become a little bit versed with the American-Russian relations in World War II.
You got to know a couple of them anyway.
Right.
Yep.
Of course, what they did was they set up the Lend-Lease program.
We gave them planes and they gave us hell.
The U.S.
pilots would fly the planes to Fairbanks and then the Russians would take over.
And they had a pretty deep system.
They had the B-25, which is a radio contact with the Earth.
And then behind it, they'd string back these pursuit planes, and they had contact with the mothership, which talked down below.
Well, those planes that they loved were the P-39s.
They had a cannon in the nose, and they loved to shoot those krauts, kraut tanks with those things.
So our job was really, basically,
contact the Siberia station, get the weather report, tell them the planes are coming, and back and forth that way.
Of course, the pilot had no, excuse me, the weather over there, and we'd get the weather report from Siberia.
And that's about it.
Give them a flight plan, how many planes are coming, and boy, we sent a lot of them over there.
Indeed.
They liked the P-39s.
Oh, they loved the P-39s.
Right.
And they would use them to fight the Germans on the Western Front.
Well, yes, strafing for the tanks, those cannons, they loved that.
So we had a couple of Russian
This old Sergeant Musienko, if you were visualizing a Russian peasant, you'd think of this guy.
Big and burly and kind of pretty nice looking, really.
And they had this cocky little Giorno with the lieutenant.
He had a little gun he wore that he'd taken off.
He was on the western front.
He'd taken off a German...
I guess a dead person.
And so they couldn't speak English, we couldn't speak German, I mean Russian.
So we communicated each other with our radio signal by writing.
Even there, you didn't use letters because Q's and R's, they had their own alphabet.
Right.
So we just spelled dot, dash, dot.
But QRM was, I have a message for it.
So we'd put QRT, which is time.
They had a question mark.
That would ask them, when are you going to come back to the station?
Of course, communicating with the Russian station on the other side, that's all we use is that kind of language.
And we found out those ladies over there
people over there, the operators were women.
So we'd flirt with them.
77 in Russian, not Russian, in Hamlang, which is 7788 with love and kisses.
So we're going to send them kisses.
That leads me to some more poetry.
As a matter of fact, I'll read this now because you talk about this in your writing.
It says, a radio station was to be built to send signals across the Bering Sea, then would follow a sky full of Lindley's planes, really
Lend-lease meant free.
When the station went on the air, I fingered the sending key.
I sent the Siberian station call letters across the Bering Sea.
I kept tapping those call letters till I achieved victory.
Radio communication were now in place across the ICC.
And then he went on to say, like you just referred to, all the Russian operators were female.
maybe grandmas or missus.
I tapped out 73s and 88s, telegraphese for love and kisses.
So you were flirting with that radio tap key, right?
This Musienko was a character.
He tried to tell us jokes in Russian.
Of course, we didn't understand.
One time he went in to know him and he came back and he's all excited.
He said, he tried.
Of course, he couldn't tell us what he said.
He showed us.
He said,
And then he started turning, just humming right away.
Hey, he'd seen his first jukebox.
Right.
Yeah.
He thought that was the greatest.
It was a peasant.
Really, he was a peasant is what he was.
Right.
He was real excited about the jukebox.
He'd seen a lot at Nome, his first one ever.
Right, right.
You were in Nome for, I guess, almost two years, right?
Yeah.
or in Alaska for almost three years.
And you kind of thought they'd thrown away your records and forgotten about you, right?
As a matter of fact, yes.
No furloughs, no.
Middle of 1943, you were transferred to Fairbanks, and then you came home in April of 1944 and served in Arizona and California at the time.
Did a lot of flight plans, numbers, call letters, just kept on being a radio guy.
But then when you came back to the United States, they kind of gave you the option of, like, where do you want to go?
You told them where you wanted to go, but you didn't get to go there, right?
Well, first of all, when I left Fairbanks, the snow was up here.
They sent me to Phoenix, Arizona.
That's a difference.
My Lord, for the first month, I worked around...
My blood thinned out.
I said, okay.
They said, hey, you've been over once.
You get your choice.
I said, okay.
Paris, B-9, Big Ben, all that stuff.
I'll take Europe.
Okay, about a couple of months, you're assigned to the Philippines.
Right, right.
I wanted to backtrack because one thing that we missed was the fact that
when you were in Alaska is, you were in Alaska on December 7, 1941.
Yes.
And what do you recall about that Sunday?
Well, there it was lunchtime, and I'd just come out of the mess hall, and this guy kept running across the way and said, hey, Pearl Harbor's been attacked.
Yeah, where's Pearl Harbor?
You know, like most people, probably didn't know where it was.
So...
I don't know why, but before the day was over, they had me out on this little dirt road with a Thompson submachine gun, which I fired once in recruit camp.
I was defending Elmsor Field.
Man, talk about silliness.
I don't know.
It shows really how...
How unprepared the U.S.
was.
Right, right.
In all, lots of regards.
That's right.
So that was the difference between you were not in war and you were in war.
They gave you a gun and said, go defend something.
Yeah.
But then you, but things ratcheted up then.
I mean, when America was in the war, things changed.
You saw things that you hadn't seen before.
Right, right, right.
More airplanes coming.
A few months after that, I'm up in Nome, and man, we got planes going to Russia about every other day practically.
Right, right.
When you came back to the States, you'd ask for Europe, so like the service normally does, they sent you to the Philippines.
Right.
About as far away from Europe as you could get.
And it was a long boat ride because they avoided the
a lot of activity, so we made a big circle and went around New Guinea and then came up to the Philippines.
I think it was about three weeks on that darn boat.
Of course, we were stacked about five high in the bunks on the ship.
It was, before the war, SS and Loreline, one of the cruise lines you paid a lot of money to ride on.
For us, it wasn't that big a deal.
Right.
By the time you got to the Philippines, though, most of the operations there were over.
The war was wrapping up.
The bomb had not been dropped yet, though.
You were in the Philippines when the bomb was dropped in 1945.
Yeah.
Right.
And all the rumors, hey, we're going to be inundated by tidal waves and the world's coming to the end and all that.
Of course, none of that had happened.
What has got us home?
Right.
But there was also obviously the rumors that everybody was dealing with that there was going to be a ground war.
in Japan.
And of course the bomb dropped and that changed all that and the war ended.
And then you were able to come home.
And a fascinating career after your service.
You came home and I believe you...
were discharged in October of 1945.
Is that right?
And you went to Colorado, because that's where your sister lived.
That's where you started out.
And you started off in college there, but then talk about after that.
First of all, after five years away from school, right out of high school, I didn't know if I'd cut college or not.
So I just said, come live with us and see if you like it.
You can cut it.
I could.
I wanted journalism, which is the best journalism school, or at least the most popular anyway.
No, it was Missouri University.
So I signed up.
Went to Columbia.
went to Columbia and if you're out of state,
You weren't entitled to housing there because you had such a shortage.
They asked for the local natives to get first.
Well, the only way I could get in was to join a fraternity.
And boy, you talk about going around and sweet-talking those days to get pledged.
I made it.
To get a place to live.
Right.
So you were a frat boy.
You don't look the part right now, but you were a frat boy.
From necessity.
Of course, I enjoyed it.
Because you needed to bed, right?
But you majored in journalism in Missouri, which is still known as one of the foremost journalism schools in the United States.
There's no doubt about that.
And that sent you to corporate journalism, as it were, because you went to work for Standard Oil Company.
And talk about what you did.
You traveled around place to place, sort of writing for their newsletter or their house organ, right?
Right.
First of all, that was the idea was I supplied for several places for jobs to be a magazine.
I didn't want to get newspapers.
What I wanted to write wanted to last more than one day.
Right.
So I...
connect with them, and they had a nice publication, magazine, monthly, and this enabled me to travel over the Midwest, 11 states.
Tulsa, Chicago, Texas City, Kansas City.
Yeah, right.
All from Wyoming to Indiana, south to Texas.
Right.
That whole area.
And talk about what you'd write about.
You would write feature stories about not only employees of Standard Oil Company, but employees of sort of a subsidiary or a supplier or people that you supplied, right?
If it had a connection with the company, like for instance, I did a story about automaking.
Well, that's because our company supplied
any number of greases and lubricants for all their, for their machines that made the automobile.
Right.
Or it might be a story about grape nuts.
Yeah, you went to Battle Creek to write about the people who make grape nuts, right?
They were up in Missouri and, well, Colorado, did molybdenum.
Right.
Mining, we supplied the materials for what they did for the mining.
I could just pick and choose, and man, it was fun.
Of course, I had to always tie in the employees.
They were either working for that outfit or they were supplying the materials in some ways.
There's one thing I wanted to backtrack to that I didn't want to miss.
Back in your service in Alaska, you had spent a lot of time writing sort of an autobiography, sort of a memoir.
in Alaska, and tell them about what happened to that.
You don't know what happened to it, but tell them.
No.
Well, as a gnome, we either were working or were sitting in the Quonset hut because there was no recreation.
On some Army base, you had the gyms and all that stuff, but gnome just didn't have all that.
Right.
So I had a typewriter, and I was
So I had to write a memoir about growing up with grandpa and grandma on the farm.
I wrote it and sent it in.
It was probably some warehouse, some place.
I don't know.
I had any idea.
It never was published, but it gave me good experience writing.
Yeah, like I said, you sent it through...
You sent it through the censors.
The censorship, yeah.
Yeah.
As a matter of fact, there was something in this book that I was going to read if I could find it.
I talked about how you wrote poetry.
Let me read this one real quick.
I love your writing.
Thank you.
It's tremendous.
You evidently enjoyed golf.
This has nothing to do with his service or anything else, and the poetry says, a bogey is one over par, an eagle is minus two.
A birdie is one under par, something I seldom do.
Come that time and around when you make those perfect swings, this wipes out all the anguish and gives your ego wings.
In golf, a birdie has no feathers and a bogey has no bacall.
When I score a triple bogey, I like to hide and ball.
Barry Bonds can smash a ball, traveling an ungodly speed.
I can't miss that little sucker sitting quietly on its tee.
That's tremendous, and you're right.
Talk about 30 years with a standard oil company.
Just some great experiences there and some great chances to write.
The beauty of being with a corporation like that, I worked for the corporation, but with several branches of it.
It would be a smaller company or it would be the marketing department or it would be the sales department or whatever.
And I had moved from, well, Tulsa, Chicago, Texas City, Kansas City, Chicago, Houston.
Right.
Now, every five years I'd move, which was nice.
I didn't want to sit behind a desk.
You were talking about the censorship.
I wish I could read this whole book.
I wish we had time.
This is an article you wrote called, Censors, Scissors, Snip, Substance from Correspondence.
It said, Mom kept all the letters I wrote from Alaska.
Long after the war, I dug into them expecting to revive some forgotten experiences.
What a pile of pablum.
There was nada, zilch, nothing in them.
remember the war was on and censorship was in effect you didn't write about the weather where you were the surroundings conditions your assignment blah blah blah we were instructed to write on only one side of a sheet thus the censor could scissor out forbidden information without gutting the letter and then you say one time i must have written something really interesting the envelope contained two strips of paper
Dear mom on one and my signature on the other.
And that was the only thing that was left of the letter.
So you had to be careful about censorships, right?
We have just a few minutes left.
You and Janet have been married for almost 60 years now.
Next February, I'd be 60.
1950.
Talk a little bit about your family.
Well, I've got four great kids.
Yeah.
Of course, I was the first one in my generation to go to college and get a degree, and I'm proud to say all four of them got their degrees, and they're doing quite well.
One of them's the local nurse here in College Station, Adele.
Another daughter is Diane up in New York.
My youngest works for the
Well, he secured it around the Washington, D.C.
with the Park Service.
Right.
And the other one lives in, works in Austin.
David works in Austin.
Brian's in New York or Washington.
Diane's in New York.
Right.
And I know your daughter and your granddaughter help you and Janet out a lot here.
You live over at Waldenbrook.
Right.
They help you.
They help you a lot.
We moved over here about 16 months ago, chose Waldenbrook because of the amenities they have.
Right, right.
Well, I'll tell you what, it's a remarkable story, and it just goes to show that it's not just the stories of combat that make World War II veterans very interesting people because you had an interesting career.
And I want to thank you for your service, but we're out of time.
It goes fast.
Thank you.
Thank you, Carl.
He started out thinking that he would be a photographer, but spent 30 years making a career of painting pictures through his written word.
And he still enjoys writing whenever he can.
Carl and Janet Huss were married in February of 1950.
We salute him for his service to our country, as we do all veterans.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
Thank you.